The theoretical training that I'd gotten in as part of public administration courses I took, business management courses, my military, limited military experience and so forth, taught me the, or I felt, pointed to the advantages of having a single line of supervision.
At one time, the Extension Service had four lines of supervision leading to each county.
And we had a separate black, but it was agriculture had its own line of supervision, home economics had its own, and then you had it.
So you had four people in a county, they'd have four different bosses.
And I didn't think that was, because we had, we were completely dependent on the
voluntary cooperation of people to work together at the local level.
I mean, if you had a county extension agent in agriculture and a county extension agent in home economics that didn't like each other or didn't, you know, couldn't work together, there were problems.
But I knew that this was going to be difficult to bring about, so we appointed a large task force headed by one of our agronomists, a very fine fellow, and we had the people look at this and look at other states and came up with what they finally led to a single line of supervision.
But we made sure that the best qualified people were put in the supervising or lead positions, and these could be men or women.
And as it happened, many men had wound up with women supervisors and vice versa.
It was more acceptable in the other direction.
There was considerable resentment, I think, in some of the field positions to have women lead, well, the argument was they don't know anything about agriculture and how can, but, you know, supervision is not about knowing programs, it's about, you know, knowing people and seeing what they get done.
But anyway, I felt it made the organization extremely more effective because we had one person at the county level, we didn't use a high, we just called him a chairman, you know, somebody
to provide leadership at the, you know, you had to deal with the county commissioners.
Unfortunate to have four people going to the county commissioners pleading for this, that, and the other.
This way you only had one person and, you know, employing secretaries and running the office and all of these type of things.
So I felt that was one of my big accomplishments in terms of the organization.
There was still the continued pressure on the part of department heads to have more control over extension specialists, which I guess because I had been so steeped in the history that we had experienced whenever we tried it, it always seemed that public service or extension came out last.
If you had joint appointees with faculty members, particularly younger faculty members,
No matter what you might say, their objective is to get published, do research, get publications out so they can get their tenure and their promotions and so forth.
And, you know, even if they were a 50% extension, it was at least at that stage of their career, and often when they had these things behind them, it could change.
We had, we felt we had a responsibility, Dr. Hutchison and I did, that if we, if we, you know, if we had a 40%, 50% appointment or whatever, that we expected that much performance, you know, or time allocation.
You know, you can't measure it accurately, but, you know, we expected performance.
We'd get many complaints from the field of people who,
were unapproachable for help, you know, because they were too wrapped up in their research or their teaching responsibilities and so forth.
Anyway, that, you know, is a stress to this day, I suppose.
It continues to be, but that was one of the problems I had to deal with and we, but as I said, I felt that wasn't a common.
We continued to have good experiences with, I guess, until the year I left, we enjoyed continuing
good support from both the federal level and the state level.
But you know, economic difficulties started in the early 80s and things went down after that in terms of resources.
In fact, I guess after I was director, they started having to eliminate positions.
And I think over the last, however long that's been, they've probably lost 300 positions in terms of, they just simply wouldn't get it.
Either at the federal level or at the state level, we're getting any increases.
in terms of funds, but they were expected to provide, you had to give salary increases to stay competitive, so the only thing you could do is, as positions became a vacant, they had to be eliminated, and that's still, unfortunately, what's happening.
Am I correct that at the state and national political level, many urban politicians looked upon the agriculture extension service as country, rural?
Yeah.
And see, the reality is now, as you know, they're less than 2% of the population is actually bona fide, what we call bona fide, at least getting 50% or more of the income.
Because in most counties, I mean, people that are still farmers,
nearly all of them have off-farm employment or their wives work off the farm.
They want to pay for their land and so forth and they can't do it from the production of it.
And of course you've had this continuous, I know for example, what we call industrialization that happened in the poultry industry.
three or four or six, maybe six operators in all of Texas.
They control the whole thing.
There are no small chicken farmers anymore.
I mean, you might see people keep a few just for organic type things and so forth.
All right, as you created the staff, who were the key staff members during your period of leadership?
Well, one of the person that served as my associate director, Joe Rode.
I spelled Rode.
R-O-T-H-E.
He was made associate director and he was, he played on the famous 39 team, had a game leg because of it, played side by side with Kimbrough.
Anyway, he was a very fine person and I tried to,
above an operation like I had, you know, experienced, like I called it the Mr. Outside and Mr. Inside and looked to him to run the organization and I'd do the outside contacts, the university.
There was a lot of activity, always is, at the federal level.
I mean, we had to go to Washington frequently for appropriations here.
Sometimes much as a month, once a month or even oftener.
And then we were often, in the land grant association, there were various committees that you served on and so forth.
You had to spend a lot of time on the road.
Not a good time to have a family.
About Monday through Friday, about how many, what percentage of the time were you out of town?
Half?
As Dr. Hutchison's wife once said,
When he does come home, he upsets the routine.
More than half, I'd say.
It's varied.
And, of course, I was stubborn enough to try to hang on to my military activities, which was stressful, too, because you had to meet, you know, once a weekend there and had to go to two weeks military camp in the summer.
We hardly ever took a family vacation.
We just couldn't work it in.
The only vacation we had at a family, I guess, was in connection with some of my assignments, committee assignments.
We'd have a meeting in Fort Collins, you know, maybe take the family along.
At least they could do some sightseeing while I was in the meeting and so forth.
Who were your, nationally, who, what colleagues did you enjoy working with most?
Nationally?
other directors or?
Well, yeah, I was mainly collectivity with among the directors.
You must have had two or three that were closest, closer friends.
Yeah, one of the things that most people don't recognize in appointing a director is that the law states us that the university, the land grant university makes the selection, but it has to have the approval of the Secretary of Agriculture.
And they may have abandoned it, but you had to have a formal interview with the Secretary of Agriculture who was Earl Butts when I, under the, I guess it was the Nixon days.
Yeah.
Do you remember what he asked about China Devils?
No, but that was about the time he'd gotten into difficulty.
You remember?
He had, he was overheard making a racial joke in the back of a plane one time, and somebody picked that up.
I think it caused this.
Was it, as you recall, was it really an interview or just a conversation?
Oh, it was, it's a pro forma thing.
I mean, I don't know.
About how long?
10 minutes, 15 at the most.
You know, it was impressive.
I mean, it made you think that your position was important there.
Let's see, other than Dr. Rodick, what other key staff members did you like?
Well, Dr. Black, I mentioned earlier, Delbert Black came to us from Oklahoma.
I brought him in.
He actually had a poultry background, but he got his degree in adult education, and they didn't have a home for him in Oklahoma State.
And he came, and we were just beginning to expand our community development programs, and he seemed to be an extremely desirable person.
And we assigned him to leadership in that area, but I don't think he was particularly happy in that because he was an action person.
And we found out soon later on as we got into these personnel problems while I was still associate director that he would
could serve a much more effective role in being personnel officer.
And he was very, very helpful to me.
I, you know, he took the time and had the intellectual ability to get, to work with our statistics department.
Forget one of the, the guy who's, he was different than everybody else in the statistics department, but he really was able to utilize
the statistical approaches, applying it to a real world situation than anybody ever saw.
I wish I could remember his name.
But he and Dr. Black actually slept together for weeks and weeks at a time because they worked out all of these regression things in the salary areas and all of that.
But Dr. Black was extremely helpful to me.
There was a gentleman that I brought in as assistant to the director named Vernon Pellet, who is no longer living.
P-E?
P-E-L-L-E-T, I think.
He had come from Wisconsin and was a, you know, and I made him, or he became assistant director for finances and this type of thing and helped with the budgets.
He was an extremely effective person.
We had a very fine administrative staff.
We had about eight people, I guess eight or nine people.
We included in that the head of the agriculture communications office.
We had, of course, the state home economics leader, the state program leaders, and the supervisors of specialists, and so forth.
And I tried to have a collegial style.
We met every week.
at least an hour or two on a designated time with an agenda to make sure that we were coordinated and operated.
It was a very happy situation in working with that group.
About how many statewide, about what was the personnel total for?
At that time, I would say we probably had about 750, 800 people working at the county level, and then another 350, 400 working at the area and state level.
So maybe 1,200?
1,100, I think is the figure we usually say, about 1,100 professionals.
Then, of course, we started adding paraprofessionals, particularly in the foods and nutrition program.
And if you, you know, accounted for secretaries, everybody that was on our budget, it got up to about 2,500 people.
And we had a pretty good, pretty sizable budget in terms of operating.
And it's an interesting mix because you, as I had, one time had an auditor with me, one time a visit from Washington, and we were audited, you know, from all directions.
It happened that, you know, we get the federal funds,
The federal fiscal year has changed, but it's October to September now.
The state fiscal year is September through August.
The counties work on a calendar year.
They said, I don't see how anybody can develop a budget when you have three different calendars, but we somehow manage.
But it was an extra challenge because you had to revamp everything in terms of your state budget and your national budget and everything else.
Did Dr. Adkisson give you any directions?
Not too much.
Guidelines?
No.
He was very much, you know, he had a particular program.
Well, that was one of the programs that started with Dr. Hutchison, but it was a national program.
That I had mentioned earlier before that was extremely successful, the pest, what do they call it, pest management program where, you know, with the environmental concerns came out that we, you know, we knew we had to start working with farmers to get them to use chemicals more intelligently.
And so they developed this program with national funds that, and a lot of this was based on Dr. Atkinson's research that if you could, you know, you could train farmers to really understand their insect problems and what they finally did was hire in selected areas what we call county entomologists who would in turn train college students in the summertime
to go out into the fields and really make, you know, research type inspections on the level of insects or disease or whatever it was.
And then, you know, if you had applied insecticides, you used, you know, the safest material possible.
The big emphasis then was to use, began using or getting farmers to use the type of chemicals that
were not persistent, you know, that broke down within a day or two after exposure to the elements instead of the very persistent ones like DDT and so forth.
DDT, you know, those new chemicals, you know, was regarded as a revolution in terms of effect.
And, you know, as I state, I will state to you and anybody else, there never has been a death attributed to DDT, but I could say that there are millions and millions of people alive today
that would not be alive because of its use against mosquitoes.
It was extremely effective against mosquitoes.
But as I said, I don't think there's ever been a human death attributed to DDT per se, but we know there are other problems.
I mean, and it's still in the environment.
We stopped using it 30 years ago, and it's still
You know, it gets concentrated through the various poo chains and so forth, and so it can, you know, it causes problems with reproduction in birds and other things.
But that was a very successful program, and Dr. Atkinson had a great deal of interest in that particular program.
Prize area and so forth related, not Nobel Prize, he got, did he?
No, he got the scientific, something, the United States equivalent.
What did he call it, the National Science Foundation?
I believe so.
Yeah, he's got one of the few people, which is an equivalent to the U.S.
Nobel.
And it was his early work, you know, that led to this, and he was very much concerned with that program.
And he worked, of course, very closely with Dr. Miller.
Dr. Miller didn't last too long, I guess, what was it, three years?
1980.
So it was about 77 to 80, about three years, yeah.
And when Dr. Hubert became the chancellor, was there any change in your, in the way you all did things?
No, not particularly.
I was, I guess I had always considered
Dr. Hubert is one of my good friends and so forth.
In fact, when I was at the University of Wisconsin in our graduate program, he called me out of the blue one day.
He was dean of education, and they were thinking about setting up a department for adult education, that general area.
And he offered me the position right off, you know.
And I felt I had a commitment to Dr. Hutchison because I'd gotten the time off, and I didn't know how he regarded this.
And Dr. Hutchison, you know, really had wanted me to come back to that other position, so I didn't accept it.
And that position, I guess, was—went to Don Seaman, if you know him.
And he started the program here, which is quite good.
But, you know, I always had thought of Dr.—the chancellor as, you know, somebody that was a friend.
And I really had no—
big direct relations with him, but Hubert, Dr. Hubert, he was, I guess, might say getting a little along in years at the time, was somewhat detached from a lot of things.
So he, working with him, you were allowed to lead as you saw?
Yeah, pretty much so.
The, when it came to
It came to a situation, I guess, in the late 81, early 82s, that I think the group that wanted, you know, department heads to have stronger position
decided it's time for me to go.
You know, they weren't getting, making the progress that they wanted to.
And I thought I was, I thought, to this day, I mean, I could show you books and books of testimony of letters I got from the field that, you know, felt that this had been an unjust action.
But anyway, I was,
called in by Dr. Hubert, I guess, with Dr. Atkinson earlier the year or something and essentially told him, I had it, you know, they were gonna make a change.
And that was that.
There was another event, I don't know if that had a bearing on the case.
As I said, I had thought Dr. Hubert was more supportive.
But I had fought him on one thing, and that may have not helped.
I guess sometimes standing on principles, at least as I saw it, everybody defines their own principles.
We had a situation where one of his top assistants, and I don't need to name names, had worked for the Extension Service briefly in an early part of his career.
And as you know, up to a certain point, the extension service people enjoyed federal appointments, and you were aware of that, and get federal retirement.
I'm drawing federal retirement today.
And of course, that sounds very good, drawing both teachers and federal retirement, but as a new worker, it was very painful because that took 7% out of your salary.
Teachers' retirement took 6%, later on 6.5%, plus the various insurance things, and it was very difficult to
to recruit new people because they were really shocked when they got their first check.
Anyway, this individual, you had to have a certain requisite number of years, 10, I think, 20, depending on.
Anyway, this particular individual decided that he would want to fill out his years of extension appointment, and I was told
by Dr. Hubert one day that he called me indirectly and he said, to put, to make him my assistant to, my assistant, and put him on, he had to be on 50% or more on extension assignment.
And I just, you know, I talked to Dr., to Mr. Freeman, you remember him?
He agreed with me.
Clyde Freeman.
But he said, I don't know that you can do anything.
But anyway, it got to be a real issue within the organization because we had been very, very strict on,
not abusing that privilege, and if anybody got a 50 percent or more assignment, that they did 50 percent or more extension.
Well, the chancellor's attitude and this individual is that, you know, they worked for extension servers generally in the legislature and, but anyway, I, you know, he did have the title of assistant to the extension director.
I tried to get him to do things.
that you often ask, call on assistance to handle correspondence of a certain nature or maybe prepare a speech or something.
And this individual constantly just bucked it to other people on my staff.
Never, never did a whole lot.
I don't think did 1%, per se, for extension.
I, you know, kept trying to get this changed and Dr. Hubert wouldn't change it.
And I guess that didn't help my own personal situation.
But anyway, I was given my walking papers and they said they immediately named Dr. Carpenter, head of animal science, as my successor.
All right, we need to.
Yeah, that's all.
I've got about 10 minutes.
Oh, oh, okay.
I need to leave at 10 afterwards.
All right, because we're not going to get quite through then.
Oh, we're going to get through, surely.
No, because we want to look back more.
Well, you know, everybody sees history from their own viewpoint.
Sure, sure.
That's my vision of it.
No.
And I, as I said, it was, I really personally think it was a great shock to the organization, at least the field staff.
I mean, they were.
really, really shocked because as I said, I was, they felt I was their friend.
They felt I had done a lot of good things.
And as I said, particularly certain groups, I think I had a particularly high
respect from the black staff members.
I mean, they appreciated what I had done in terms of getting the salary situation and administration.
The home economics of the predominantly female staff felt that they had an equal share of the organization or an equal or, you know, were recognized.
Probably a little less support from the agricultural groups because they had, you know, some of them didn't like having women supervisors and so forth.
But anyway, then I was, they made some, gave me some fictitious that they would create some center in the Department of Agricultural Education and Training Center, which I knew was just fiction and, you know, I didn't accept it.
But anyway, I was given the opportunity to have an appointment in the Department of Agricultural Education
which I did and really enjoyed because in September of 82 I started with that department and was immediately given responsibility for teaching courses in adult education and they had an undergraduate course in extension for people who were thinking about extension as a career and then later on got much involved in international activities.
And you did that for how many years?
Oh, Haskell, it kind of, my wife always asks me, I can't ever get this straight, but I continued in that position full-time until about 86, 87.
I had more than enough for my federal retirement, and then I went on half-time assignment and worked just nine months, half-time, teaching some of the courses.
Then I think even later I took my state retirement, and then there was even a period, you know, where you could be re-employed, annuitant.
So I kind of stretched my retirement out.
And I think it was in the early 90s that I probably, before I completely retired, but, you know, I continued to,
I have a little office over in the department.
They still call on me to serve on committees.
I fill in on teaching.
I occasionally will take a course, particularly international courses, for years and years.
We took a group of graduate students and professors to another country to look at international agricultural programs and so forth.
And I guess the last one I did was about three or four years ago to Germany.
As you look back on all of the, this long career of service,
What did it mean to you that you were an Aggie?
What did you learn, being a student here once upon a time, what did you learn that was... Well, I think the biggest thing that you could point to is the whole area of leadership.
You know, you have to... Explain that.
I bought into the situation.
In order to be a good leader, you have to be a good follower first.
And we certainly got in the cadet corps and got that type of thing.
We had to be good followers.
I think from that position, you got to understand what good leadership was and what bad leadership was.
And, you know, I felt that drawing on those examples, even though that it was pretty much a military setting, had application in other areas that you had to, you know, provide leadership
in a way that, you know, that you can't provide leadership unless you have good followers and you have to.
The thing is people have to understand why they're doing things and so forth.
And I always felt I tried to get, you know, as much involvement on the part of people who would be affected by decisions
to make their input and so forth, but I felt, you know, ultimately the leader has to make the decision.
All right.
What else other than leadership came from that you learned about while you were an Aggie?
I think that's the main thing I could point to.
I think the whole area of leadership.
What feelings do you carry in your heart today for Texas A&M?
Absolutely supportive.
I wouldn't participate in the Century Club and some of the other programs if I didn't believe that was so.
I'm thoroughly indoctrinated and have no regrets.
I mean, as I mentioned earlier in my interview, my parents really didn't want me to come to Texas A&M.
They weren't so sure they even wanted me to go to college, but certainly if I went, I should go closer to home like San Antonio Junior College or something.
And it was my decision to come here because I thought this was a great place to get an education.
I had the strong Extension commitment because I had seen what Extension had done for my family.
I mean, it made all the difference in the world in our getting through the Depression and that type of thing.
And I guess even more than my cadet experience, the
admiration I had for extension agents, you know, that caused me to say I want to be like that.
I had no idea, you know, of leadership beyond that.
I mean, my objective then was to be a county extension agent.
I think I could have been happy being that in my whole career, and it didn't work out that way.
If you were giving advice to the extension leaders today, what would it be?
The, I think the, it's so easy to get away from what the local people really want.
I mean, I think you have to have a real close ear.
I mean, even when I go into, I'm often asked to evaluate U.S.
Agency for International Development projects.
And if you go visit into, as an administrator or evaluator, go into, into an area,
The local people that are being evaluated or being looked at are always going to make sure you see the best and don't see the worst.
I mean, we all do that, and I've been there on that side too.
But I always make it a point, and I did when I was director, and I do it when I evaluate programs.
I said, wait, stop here.
at a farm that somebody they haven't identified and talk to a local person.
You know, do you know about the Extension Service?
You know, what do you like about, that's what I do when I do an evaluated farm because they tell me how wonderful their projects are and you, you know, you go five miles from where they're located and you find people that have never heard of them, you know, that kind of thing.
So I think it's important to keep your feet on the ground to understand what the sentiment out there is and I don't think you can get that indirectly.
I think you have to have
You have to be out there some of the time.
I mean, you can't depend, just like a military commander, you know, he'll always be given the favorable and never given the unfavorable news, and if you don't go out there and look yourself, you begin to believe what they give you, and that can be disastrous.
Are there any areas that you think that Extension ought to give more attention today?
Any topical areas, not geographic?
Topical areas?
Any concerns that they ought to spend more time on?
I think this, well, they're beginning to, but I think they're little, they didn't, we didn't move out as fast as we should have in this whole area of using technology in terms of computers and so forth.
They're wonderful for agriculture.
I mean, you know, you can test all kinds of
ideas you have on how economists know that it's the mix of enterprises.
I mean, this much cotton and this much beef or, you know, when you have several things going.
And there's an optimum somewhere there of a mix.
And you can do that with computers that, you know, take you years to try to compute other.
And then it's just a matter of transferring information.
As I think pointed out in a meeting the other day with
Chancellor Graves, it may have been extension moved too, I mean, the university and extension moved too early.
As a result, some of our stuff is antiquated.
Some of the schools have waited later got better stuff.
And we have a problem now, particularly in our county extension offices, in terms of computer technology.
they have to fit in with the local situation and everyone's different.
I mean, you know, your county systems and it creates a big problem, but I think this is a development that Extension can, needs to do a lot more with because, I mean,
I guess ultimately it'll replace publications, the computer will, because of having local outlets.
It'll, you know, just having a farm meeting on Wednesday night or Thursday night or something like that is probably passe now.
But I think there's still, and there's still a lot of farm people out there that, you know, things have gotten bigger and so forth, but...